[Music]
the 20th century was full of awesome
breakthroughs and historical events but
some of them stood out even from that
incredible crowd and one such event was
the mission of Soyuz 5 which made huge
headlines not only for its importance
but for its amazing style and it's
incredible landing Soyuz 5 translated
from russian as union 5 was a Soviet
spacecraft launched on January 15 1969
just like the u.s. space program Soyuz
had numbers for each of their
spacecrafts
but Soyuz 5 had one peculiarities it was
sent to the orbit just a day after
another craft Soyuz 4 went there they
had one mission between the two of them
it was a man docking and transfer of the
crew if the mission had become a success
it would have been the first such feat
performed in the history of humankind
the whole thing was all the more
important because it was a third attempt
already the previous missions so used
one and three failed to complete their
tasks docking with Soyuz two so the
hopes were high this time around
first on January 14th Soyuz 4 was
launched into orbit with one man on
board
Wladimir shuttle off he was to wait for
the second spacecraft and help its crew
with the docking Soyuz five came the
following day with three men on board
and the mission began in earnest it was
the first space flight for all four of
the cosmonauts which made their
responsibilities even higher as Soyuz 5
was approaching its sister craft the
preparations were already underway on
both ships it wasn't until the day after
however that the docking took place
everyone was holding their breaths as
the world watched the two spacecrafts
connected slowly but steadily Soyuz 4
which was the active craft in the
mission maneuvered carefully and gave
instructions to the other ship's crew so
that everything went smoothly all
communications except those between them
went silent it was just too important to
fail once again and then at 8:20 a.m.
the crafts linked together the mission
was a success as the principal Soviet
news agency put it that was the first
experimental space station ever with
room for four members of the crew the
American Apollo 9 mission repeated this
experience only two months later next up
though was probably the most intrepid
part of the whole endeavor two members
of the Soyuz 5 crew engineers Alexey
yellow Sayyaf and yevgenii crew knov
were to walk through the stretch of open
space between the crafts and board Soyuz
for joining its commander it was not
only part of their current mission but
also a training element for the
perspective moon landing for this walk
the engineers put on their
state-of-the-art spacesuits helped by
commander Boris Valen off the third crew
member of the same spacecraft the suits
were specifically designed for the Soyuz
missions but because of different
problems during the first two attempts
their use was delayed until
deny and finally their day of glory had
come Commander volonoff checked the
suits of his men and went down to the
descent module he was the one to stay on
Soyuz 5 and return to Earth
which he did in a most remarkable
fashion but I'll tell you about it in a
minute first he checked if everything
was ok for the last time
then he depressurized the module the
engineers were in there was no coming
back for them now
Moscow television covered everything
that happened on board and brought it
live to the Soviet citizens crew Knopf
was the first one to get out leaving the
module while it was still flying over
South America unable to communicate with
the ground by radio his walk wasn't long
but suddenly he noticed that one of his
oxygen lines got tangled yellow Sayyaf
who went next had to help his partner
together the two cosmonauts solved the
problem and continued on to the waiting
spacecraft there was one thing they
didn't know yet however because of the
incident yellow Sayyaf forgot to install
a video camera outside the hatch of the
orbital module unfortunately this meant
there would be no footage of the
spacewalk there was still a video
transmission though and despite its poor
quality scores of miles below the whole
country watched as the two space
engineers walked through the vacuum to
make a historic moment and when they
finished their transfer and locked the
hatch of Soyuz 4 behind them everyone on
the ground gave a standing ovation it
was a complete success no one in the
whole world had done before what the
brave cosmonauts achieved that day
onboard Soyuz 4 commander shadowlaw met
his colleagues with open arms and they
gave him newspapers letters and
telegrams issued after his ascent to the
orbit to prove that it was all true the
connection and space walk did take place
all of this was recorded on video and
broadcast to earth now in best quality
possible-- all in all the two spacecraft
stayed connected for four hours and 35
minutes after which commander volonoff
pulled away he was scheduled to descend
on January 18th a day after the Soyuz 4
crew the thing is Soyuz 4 had more fuel
and more people
on board now so it had to re-enter the
atmosphere and land earlier Valen offs
arrival was thus delayed shed Olaf Kroon
off and yellow Sayyaf directed their
spacecraft towards the earth on the
morning of January 17th during the whole
descent commander shadow lauf was live
giving commentary on the flight for
everyone to see once again it was the
first feat of this kind in history at
9:35 a.m. Soyuz 4 fell through a
blizzard into the snowy steppes of
Kazakhstan safe and sound within minutes
a rescue helicopter came and all three
space crew members were carried off to
safety on the ground
everyone at the control center was
celebrating the mission was a huge
success so far and no one doubted that
nothing could go wrong allye commander
volonoff remained behind but after the
successful landing of the soyuz for
descent module
there was little worried about his
well-being he never lost contact with
the earth and so nobody could have
predicted what was going to happen next
and that was horrifying volonoff started
his re-entry already not in a normal way
for some reason he was unable to
complete orientation of his spacecraft
for retrofire which is a sort of space
braking system
after several futile attempts the
command center scheduled an automatic
retro fire to help the cosmonaut get
back to earth that did help but Valen
offs ordeal had only just begun six
seconds after the retro fire the descent
module of the spacecraft should have
been detached from the instrument module
with the help of a controlled explosion
after that volonoff should have bulleted
through the atmosphere in a bell shaped
capsule its bottom had an especially
thick layer of protective material it
should have partly melted because of all
the friction but the cosmonaut inside
would have remained healthy this is how
it should have happened what actually
went down was absolutely different the
blasts didn't connect the two modules
and volonoff capsule re-entered the
atmosphere with the wrong side it was
the side where the hatch was located and
it had only one inch of protection by
all calculations the fridge
was bound to burn through at least three
inches of the material when he realized
what was happening
Valen off thought it was the end of him
for the next harrowing half-hour he
washed and felt how the insane pressure
and heat destroyed the capsule around
him he knew the protective layer
wouldn't last long but kept reporting
his status into the voice recorder as
the flames engulfed the module from the
outside the temperature inside kept
rising at some point the heat started
destroying the hatch and toxic smoke
filled the cabin then a thundering clap
made volonoff start it was the explosion
of the propellant tanks in the
instrument module his whole world was
now concentrated in a small
claustrophobic space that was rapidly
falling apart but then a miracle
happened the struts connecting the two
modules finally snapped and the capsule
pulled by its heavier side tumbled over
and faced the atmospheric rampage with
the protected flank as was intended
volonoff was saved by wild chance this
wasn't the end of it either though the
tumble sent the module flying astray and
the parachutes opened only in part
because their lines got entangled so
instead of falling more or less
peacefully on the ground the capsule
with a man inside dropped like a rock
from the sky and finally to add insult
to injury the soft landing system didn't
work correctly either when the module
hit the ground the impact sent volonoff
flying into the wall opposite him
breaking several of his teeth Soyuz 5
landed almost 350 miles away from its
intended landing point at first volonoff
could only lie inside the capsule and
thank the good fortune for being alive
but the temperature outside was freezing
and he knew it would take the rescuers
several hours to get to him so he got up
located a column of smoke in the
distance and walked there until he
reached some peasants house the owner
took him in and together they waited for
the rescue party when they came at last
Valen off looked at the men arriving to
pick him up and all he asked is my hair
gray
that's one brave spaceman hey if you
learn something new today then give the
video a like and share with a friend and
here are some other videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left or
right and remember stay on the bright
side of life
[Music]